---
layout: post
title: The Wine Muse
date: 2014-01-30 00:00:00
author: Jonas De Maere
description: On wine as a symbol of art, culture, religion, and inspiration throughout history.
tags: wine art culture history inspiration symbolism
categories: wine
---

_First published in the print edition of Good Wine Magazine, 2014._

Art, science, joy, love, and many other virtues of life have been symbolized by wine. Throughout history poems have been written about the quality of wine, songs have been sung about the pleasures of wine, and various wine scenes have been pictured in paintings. I have to admit that although I drink quite some wine, I'm not the most artistic person myself. However, when I think about the moments I was creative, I realize that wine might have been part an important of my inspiration. Being convinced that wine somehow stimulates inspiration I would like to use the metaphor of the muse.

The muses are nine goddesses in Greek mythology who control and symbolize nine types of arts known to the Ancient Greeks. Those beautiful young women have been the symbolization of inspiration during the history of art and science. Just as there is no such thing that captures men's imagination more than young beautiful women, there is no other drink that captures men's imagination more than wine. Many poets, painters, sculptors, and writers had predilection for good wine. Wine has been subject of many hymns and has been praised in any kind of art.

Many centuries of human civilization have considered wine symbolic. Throughout history wine has had three important meanings: wine as a symbol of social status, wine as symbol of the own prestigious culture, and wine as a symbol of religion. Wine already acquired its symbol of social status in Ancient Egypt. Hieroglyphs show that wine in Egypt was reserved for the pharaoh, clergy, and higher officials. In Ancient Greece winemaking flourished and wine became a symbol of social status. The Greeks considered wine important in the spread of their civilization and culture. It was the drink of the elite and a centerpiece of the famous symposia, immortalized by Plato and the poets of the period. During the Roman Empire wine became a symbol of prestige and supremacy. Being able to cultivate and drink wine was a sign of cultural richness and sophisticated socio-economic structure. However, the status that wine achieved would have been impossible without religion. Wine has always been considered as a drink with mystical significance. How grape juice transformed into such a wonderful spirit fascinated men's imagination. Many believed in the divine characteristics of wine. The Greek god, Dionysus, is probably the most well-known god of wine. Yet, Dionysus was not only the god of wine, but also of ritual madness and ecstasy. Drinking wine also reflected passion, pleasure, and emotion. Let that also be the topics we highly value in arts.

Fortunately, wine did not lose its characteristics as a source of inspiration. Today we still see many references in culture to wine. It is perhaps during the Renaissance when economy, arts, and science flourished that wine got its place as social symbol that it carries today. In the late medieval ages technologic advancements improved the quality of wine. During the Renaissance, the virtues wine were appreciated by increasingly sophisticated wine drinkers, and by the 18th century the wine trade soared, especially in France, where Bordeaux became the preeminent producer of fine wines. A notable period is the Romantic Era in 19th century France where artists and poets wanted to escape the scientific rationalization of nature and found their salvation in wine. Considering the symbolic value that wine still has in religion, for example, we notice that traditions have been kept alive. In Christianity the Eucharist would not be possible without wine. Also in contemporary art artists are still inspired by wine. But even more so than inspiring artists, today is maybe the first time in history that wine has become art itself. Winemakers have become craftsmen and pay more attention than ever before to the vinification and marketing of their wines. As a matter of fact this is reflected by the prices consumers are willing to pay for some iconic wines. And as with all art the real value of a masterpiece is difficult to determine.

Does this than mean that wine is elitist? I would say it is not. Wine stimulates the conversation, takes away barriers, and creates unity. It is true that wine experts sometimes use sophisticated words to describe their impressions of wine. But don't let yourself be intimidated. Isn't it true that we all like to discuss with our friends while drinking a good glass of wine? That is exactly why appreciating wine has been considered as a sign of culture. And this is where the muse hides in the wine. People find pleasure in wine, it connects us to our friends, and it makes us enjoy life. It is during these moments that we find inspiration for our next goal in life.
